Project Gutenberg's Canadian Eclipse Party 1869, by Commander E. D. Ashe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Canadian Eclipse Party 1869

Author: Commander E. D. Ashe

Release Date: February 23, 2011 [EBook #35375]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADIAN ECLIPSE PARTY 1869 ***




Produced by Walter MacDonald II








                CANADIAN ECLIPSE PARTY

                        1869.





                   THE PROCEEDINGS

                        OF THE


                CANADIAN ECLIPSE PARTY


                        1869.






                  BY COMMANDER ASHE.

             Director Observatory, Quebec.




                       Quebec:
     PRINTED BY MIDDLETON & DAWSON, AT THE "GAZETTE"
              GENERAL PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT.

                        1870.




                         THE

                CANADIAN ECLIPSE PARTY

                        1869.

                      __________

Before giving an account of my proceedings in reference to the
eclipse, I think it only right, in justice to our party, to state
that the arrangements were made very hastily, as it was not until
the last moment that would admit of my reaching the station allotted
to me by the American astronomers, viz., Jefferson City, that I was
informed that $400 had been appropriated for the purpose of taking
my telescope to Iowa.

The party consisted of Mr. Douglas, Mr. Falconer, and myself.

As we had only three days to get ready, there was much to be done,
dismounting the telescope and making cases for the several parts,
and carefully packing photographic materials. Instead of the stone
support for telescope (eight inches aperture and 9 feet focus) I
had one made of wood, but as the centre of gravity was raised so
high by using wood, I had to take great care in the formation of
the base; however, the stability was excellent. Our arrangements
were all complete by the 26th of July, and we started that evening
by the Montreal boat.

For the benefit of those who may undertake an expedition of a similar
kind, it may be well to mention a few incidents that occurred during
our journey, which, although trifling in themselves, may prove useful
to future eclipse parties. I may mention that two of the cases,
containing parts of the telescope, were directed "Eclipse Expidition,"
with three i's in Expedition. This was pointed out to me at Montreal,
but the mistake is excusable, for evidently the more eyes we have
in an astronomical expedition the better. With regard to original
spelling, I will relate the following anecdote, which would have
suited "Artemus Ward."

The boatswain of a man-of-war has to keep a rough expense book of
the different stores that he uses, and this is checked by the master,
who on one occasion sent for Mr. Parks, and when lie came, he said:
"Oh, Mr. Parks, you have expended too much rope for those 'jib guys;'
it will surely be found fault with; you had better reduce the
quantity;" and on handing him the book, he said: "By the bye, b-l-o-x
is not the way to spell blocks." The boatswain took the book very
sulkily; and after he had taken two steps towards the door, he turned
round, and said "Well, sir, if b-l-o-x don't spell blocks, what do
it spell?"

We started on our journey by the evening train. When we arrived at
Port Huron our first difficulty occurred; the Custom-House officers
would not pass our baggage, although we pointed out the great importance
of our party, and also, that the moon would not wait an instant for
us. They did not see it; so our baggage was locked up for the night.
We took rooms at a small inn, and then Mr. Douglas and I went by rail
to Huron, to see the head of the Customs. After going up two flights
of stairs, we were shewn into a room which two gentlemen occupied.
The chief was smoking, with the chair resting on its two hind legs
and his resting on the table. We told our story, and shewed him a
certificate from the American Consul at Quebec. He looked very hard
at me, took the cigar out of his mouth, wrote a pass which he handed
to me, and then resumed his cigar and former position. We began to
thank him, but as he hid himself in smoke, we retreated down stairs.

I never was more struck with the kindness of our American cousins
than I was during this trip. On all occasions, they did all in their
power to promote our convenience. In the morning we had time to see
Mr. Muir, the director of the railway, who kindly gave us a free
passage over his line, a kindness that was shewn to us by all the
directors of the different lines that we travelled on. I may remark
that the cases with the heavier parts of the telescope were broken,
and I much feared that the instruments would be seriously damaged.
Mr. Muir very kindly had outside cases put on, and I carried the most
valuable part (the object glass) in my hand. After we left Chicago,
and before going to bed, we left word to be called before crossing
the Mississippi. It is not fair to judge of scenery from a view taken
through the window of a railway car, but I must say that I was
disappointed,--shallow, sluggish, and muddy; but then I ought to
remember that I live on the banks of one of the finest and most
beautiful rivers in the world.

In the morning we were on the prairie, which is not so flat as I had
expected to see it, but it is a beautiful undulating country, and if
there were trees upon it nothing more could be desired. It was
explained to me by a gentleman who was travelling with us, the
reason why trees do not grow on this beautiful land. It appears
that on the eastern bank of all rivers and streams only do trees
grow; now without entering into the cause of the prairies catching
fire, I will only say that in September, when the long grass is
quite dry, they do catch fire, and then burn until it is stopped
by a river, and as it always burns to windward, and as the wind
generally blows in one direction, we have a solution why the trees
only grow on one side of a river; and once the primeval forest is
removed, it never has a chance of growing again, as the young trees
are sure to be burnt, and the beautiful black soil of the prairie
is enriched by the deposit of burnt grass.

At one station where we stopped to water our engine, I saw two
children of the soil; they have good reason to complain at their
lot. The buffalo and antelope driven away, and if they are hungry
they are told to go and dig; dig, how can they dig? let us reverse
the picture. Suppose that our cities and towns were by the Indians
turned into a prairie, and when we were hungry they told us to go
away and catch a buffalo, a pretty hand I should make of catching a
buffalo. The sooner the poor fellows are shot down or killed by
small-pox, the sooner they will go to their happy hunting grounds.

As the Norway rat kills all other rats that it meets, so the savage
must disappear, and the Northern races of Europe will exterminate
them.

There is one exception, the African negro, and no matter what you
do to him he thrives under the treatment; whether free or in slavery
he multiplies and is happy. Strange that rum which kills the Indian,
only makes him fat.

But the king of savages--the New Zealander--has the fairest island,
in the most favored clime, taken from him, and civilization forced
upon him.

There is no getting away from this civilization now. But I am
thankful to say that I was at San Francisco before it arrived there.
When out shooting I saw the fresh foot-prints of a grizzly bear,
and did not know how far the gentleman might have been from me at
that moment. Now, I should like to know how far you would have to
travel, and how much you would have to spend, before you could
experience the same delightful sensation.

I have seen real Indians with real bows and arrows, in Vancouver's
Island; and the place where I then saw them, now has become the
head-quarters of the Pacific squadron; and the Indians, instead of
flattening their heads, no doubt have put on the Grecian bend. Where
is all this to stop?

It was pointed out to me that most of the telegraph-posts were
struck by lightning; no wonder; for that king of natural forces,
that for so many thousands of years has reigned supreme-splitting
the granite rock, and shivering the mighty oak at his will--now
to be brought into existence at the will of an apothecary boy,
placed in two cups and locked up in a cupboard, and then made travel
day and night, over hill and dale, and under the vast ocean, to
carry messages at the bidding of man,--no wonder, I say, that he
should try and knock the whole concern into a cocked hat!

"Boonsboro! twenty minutes for dinner!!" Now, then, we shall have
something in keeping with the prairie,--I suppose a deer roasted
on a stake. Nothing of the sort. I went into a nice dining-room;
saw a quantity of pretty girls, or rather young ladies, with short
sleeves and low dresses. "Soup, sir! chicken, sir! peas, sir!" The
station at Rugby is nothing to it. After twenty minutes of capital
feeding, we heard, "all aboard! all aboard!" and as we left, the
father of these young ladies was standing at the door, and obliged
us by taking half-a-dollar, a great improvement on the English
system, where, on asking the waiter for your bill, he asks: "What
'ave you 'ad?" and begins to add accordingly. The next station was
Jefferson, 1,398 miles from Quebec. Here the boxes were again thrown
out, and the train left for San Francisco. The boxes were left at
the station, and we drove up to the hotel, about half-a-mile from
the station. As this was Saturday, July 31st, we had exactly a week
to select a site and to build an observatory-mount the telescope
and take preliminary observations. The American parties were several
weeks at their station before the day of the eclipse, and found it
not too long to prepare.

Jefferson city is three years old, has about eight thousand inhabitants,
and looks a thriving place. The next day, after church, Mr. Douglas
and I rode across the prairie to a station situated about eight miles
on the railway from Jefferson. As it was nearer to the central line
of eclipse, we wanted to see if it would do for the site of our
observatory.

I forgot to mention that the day before I left Quebec, in pulling
off my boot I broke the tendon of the plantaris muscle, which made
me quite lame. However, the six days' comparative rest made it much
better, but still it was far from well.

"We started for our ride across the prairie about two o'clock, and
reached the station in about an hour and a-half. We crossed several
streams and some marshy ground, and started several prairie chickens.
After examining the place, and finding that it would be very inconvenient
to get the material there, we thought that it would be better to remain
at Jefferson, and we mounted to return. After we had left some time,
and as I was suffering from my leg, and could not ride fast, I
persuaded Mr. Douglas to ride on, and get back before sunset to
keep an appointment with a carpenter, and not to mind me, as I
could ride slowly back. He very reluctantly did so, and when I was
left alone, I felt quite at home, steering my horse across the
boundless prairie by the setting sun. Now, my horse had crossed
many streams, and soft wet places in going out, so I took it for
granted that he knew more about the prairie than I did, and would
not allow me to get into difficulties, and consequently steered a
straight course for that point of the compass in the direction of
Jefferson. The sun had just touched the horizon. I was crossing some
marshy ground with reeds up to my shoulders, when I saw my horse's
nostrils distended, and his ears forward. I immediately put my helm
down and brought him round, and just as I had done so, down he sank;
I found myself up to my ankles in mud, and up to the calf of the leg
in water; the horse was fixed immovable, no struggling, but snorting
and dreadfully frightened. I have been in various situations of
difficulty; but when I looked up and saw the tall reeds far above
my head, and the sun setting, I must confess that I thought my case
a serious one. I remembered the fate of a young French officer of
the combined fleet that was at anchor at the entrance to the "Dardanelles,"
who went on shore to shoot, and as he did not return that night, we
landed in the morning to look for him, and not far from the ship, we
found him in a bog up to his waist, his gun a few feet in front of
him, and he quite dead. I knew that if a man once gets up to his
waist, it would be impossible to extricate himself; however, when I
dismounted I sank up to my knees, and although that was not the place
to philosophize, still I did so, and I began to think what is the
reason that a man in struggling works himself down, and I immediately
discovered that on raising the heel I produced a vacuum, as the mud
prevents either water or air getting underneath the foot, and so
with 15 lbs. to the square inch, in addition to your weight you soon
disappear. That being the case, I did not attempt to raise the foot,
but moved it backwards and forwards in a horizontal position until I
made the hole so big, that water got under the foot, when I could lift
it up with the greatest ease. After extricating myself I tore down
some reeds and made a platform round my horse, then I patted his neck,
and spoke good-naturedly to him, and then went astern, and by means
of his tail worked him backwards and forwards with a rolling kind
of motion to let the water well round his feet, and lastly went ahead,
passed the bridle over his neck, and sat down with it in my hands
right ahead. Now, then, old boy, "up she rises," the horse began to
struggle, I kept the head-rope taut, and he was freeing himself
bravely. If I let go the bridle too soon, he would go back; if I
held on too long, he would be upon me, and not only kill me but
bury me, so at the critical moment I let go, and rolled over and
over amongst the reeds, and the horse floundered past me. When I
got on my feet no horse was to be seen, but only the tops of the
reeds moving as he was making his way out. I thought I had not
improved my situation much, for with my leg I could not walk a mile,
and, of course, the horse had shaped his course for the stable.
However, when I emerged from the reeds, I saw the dear old fellow
standing as still as if he were in his stable. But now came another
difficulty with my lame leg, I could not put a foot into the stirrup,
perhaps he might have been in a circus and taught to lay down, so I
began kicking his forelegs and lifting up one and then the other--but
no--he had no idea of it: then I thought I would lash his feet
together with the bridle and throw him down, but there might be some
difficulty in my remaining on his back when he floundered to get up,
well, if the worst comes to the worst, I will lash myself to his
tail and make him tow me home; but an idea struck me, I lengthened
the near stirrup to about a foot and a-half of the ground, and then
lengthened the other and brought it over on the same side, and here
I had a nice little ladder to walk up which I did, and then knelt on
the saddle and dropped into my seat. I could not help shaking hands
with myself, and patting my steed on the neck, I then commenced my
journey home, which I reached just before dark.

[Photograph: VIEW OF JEFFERSON CITY, IOWA, FROM OBSERVATORY.]

We had agreed to erect the observatory about half a mile from the
station, on a rising part of the prairie; carpenters were engaged,
and an arrangement made with a lumber merchant, who would supply
what I wanted and take it back when I had done with it, only charging
us for the damage done to the stuff. Early on Monday morning, the
instruments were carted out and unpacked; and at sunset the four
walls of the observatory were up. Now, as we thought it not advisable
to leave all these things open on the prairie, it was agreed that
some one should sleep there--and, of course, it was my duty to
remain. They sent down a mattrass, pillow, and blanket; there was
no wood to build a large fire outside, but I collected some chips,
and lit a small fire inside, and placed my mattrass alongside. A
little after sunset a musquito looked over the wall, and then
sounded the assembly; on they came, and I with my head in the smoke
kept blowing the fire, putting on wet grass to make a smoke; but,
after half an hour at this work, I found out the fact that man was
not intended for a pair of bellows, and although I assisted the
action by compressing my sides with my hands, still at the end of
the half hour that I blew I found that I was blown. When once my
head was out of the smoke, the musquitoes flew at me; I stood up
to fight them, but in so doing I had to fight myself also. Now an
army was drawn up in contiguous columns on my cheeks, the skirmishers
advancing through my eye-brows; at their first volley I felt as if I
was struck with a hackle. I really think that they work their stings
like the needle of a sewing machine. Maddened, I struck myself a
fearful blow with both hands in the face, and had the satisfaction
of making them "leave that," and so I fought myself and the musquitoes
for some time: still they attacked me with an impetuosity truly
marvellous, and where one fell two took his place. I was getting
weak; a storming party had now taken possession of my right ear;
I clenched my fist, and with a swinging blow, cleared the ear, but
knocked myself down. Exhausted and worn out, I put my hands into my
pockets, and gave them my head. In that half-dreamy state, the
long, long hours were passed; and after they had breakfasted,
dined and supped, they began to discuss me. "Ah," said one, "if
you want a good drink, strike between the corner of the eye and
the nose." "No, no," said a large party; "if you want a draught
of good sparkling astronomer, sink your pump in his temple." "You
are wrong," said a dissipated old fellow with frayed wings; "just
creep up his cuff, and harpoon his wrist, and there you will drink
until you lift yourself off your legs." Then they sung the following

                          SONG.

     "The blood of the Indian is dark and flat,
     And that of the buffalo hard to come at
     But the blood of the astronomer is clear and bright:
     We will dance and we'll drink the live-long night.

 Chorus:-"How jolly we are with flights so airy;
     Happy is the mosquito that dwells on the prairie."

And then they quarrelled and fought with each other, and made
speeches,--and so the dreary hours dragged along; but when the
eastern horizon was tinted with beams of light, they staggered
off to their respective marshes-some to die of apoplexy, others
of _delirium tremens_. Verdict--served them right. From dawn until
six, I had a refreshing sleep, and when my relief came, I awoke up,
and began to think whether I had heard all this, or only dreamt it.
I suppose I dreamt it.

The work now made rapid progress: doors with locks, dark room settled,
platform for telescope support firmly laid. The next day, began to
mount the telescope, but when we came to screw in the object-glass,
we found out that the brass seat in the tube had been pressed into
an oval. What was to be done? No one in Jefferson that knew anything
about it; too late to send it anywhere; here was a great break-down.
However, a Mr. Kelly said he would try; and after some hours' hard
work, he got the object-glass screwed home, but could not be unscrewed;
so the flats that hold the bolts that secure the object-glass to
the telescope could not be put on, but we secured it as well as we
could.

It is important to mention that before arriving at Jefferson, we
made the acquaintance of a Mr. Vail, from Philadelphia, who was
going to Des Moines to observe the eclipse, and as I had a 42-inch
telescope by Dolland, without an observer, I asked him to join our
party and observe the eclipse with it, which he kindly consented
to do; and his report is of the very greatest consequence, as it
confirms, in a most striking manner, the details that are seen in the
negatives.

By Friday night, all preparations were made, and we retired to rest
with great doubts about having a fine day.

[Photograph: CLEAR FOR ACTION.]

However, Saturday came at last, and the morning was hazy and overcast;
but about eight, the clouds began to break and Mr. Vail and I took
some observations for "time." The afternoon was cloudless; but still
a haze near the horizon. At half-past three, we "Beat to quarters."
Mr. Douglas shut himself up in the dark room; I took charge of the
telescope; Mr. Stanton, with a light cloth, covered and uncovered
the "object glass;" Mr. Vail had his telescope nicely adjusted;
and Mr. Falconer was seated in a very good position to observe the
dark shadow crossing the country, and to note any other phenomena.
At 3h. 38m. 40s., local mean time, the first contact took place,
and the first photogram taken, shewing a slight indentation on the
sun's limb. We took the partial eclipse with an eye-piece, giving a
3-inch picture but as it was hazy, I removed it before totality,
and took the photograms in the principal focus.

I may remark that no one could have had a better view of the eclipse
than I had. As I stood in rear of the telescope, I had only to count
the double beats of the pendulum of the "Driving Clock," which I did
without taking my eyes off the moon.

I exposed the plates of totality for ten seconds, then withdrew the
holder, and handed it to Mr. Douglas. We took several photograms of
the partial eclipse before totality, four during totality, and two
after; but the weather had become so hazy, immediately after the sun
made its appearance, that we could hardly get a picture. As all the
reports are published, it only remains for the Jefferson party to
give theirs, and the eclipse of 1869 can be fully discussed. There
are one or two points that the negatives of our party will throw
a light upon.

With regard to the bright band on the sun, bordering the moon, in
the pictures of the partial eclipse, it is well known that, there
is nothing surrounding the moon that could produce that effect; and
also, that the photograms taken at Burlington, shew, beyond a doubt,
that it is no optical illusion. Dr. Curtis has suggested that it is
caused by diffraction; still, I very much doubt if diffraction could
produce such a uniform dark broad band, so well defined, as is seen
in those photograms. One of the photograms of the partial eclipse
that we took before totality, shews the cusps and edge of the moon
to be double, giving the appearance of a band surrounding the moon.
This is caused by the reflection of the moon from the second or
underside of the glass, which happens when the sun is not in the
centre of the field; and by holding the negative of a partial eclipse
so that the light will fall obliquely on it, you will see a dark
band surrounding the moon's limb, from the same cause.

                     "BAILEY'S BEADS."

In the eclipse of 1860, I had the honor of being attached to the
American Expedition that went to the coast of Labrador. Professor
Alexander, Dr. F. A. Barnard and myself, who were observing with
telescopes, all exclaimed at the same time, "Bailey's Beads!" It
is very true, that at Otumwa a picture at the last instant, just
before totality, was taken, "shewing the sun's edge cut by the peaks
of the lunar mountains into irregular spots;" but these were not the
Bailey Beads that I saw in Labrador, and I am confident that neither
Professor Alexander nor Dr. Barnard will accept that solution. In the
report of Mr. W. S. Gilman, junr., who observed the eclipse at Sioux
city, Mr. Farrel gives a description and drawing of Bailey's Beads;
and what he saw in 1869, I saw in 1860, the film of light broken into
rectangular pieces, which appeared to swim along the edge of the
moon like drops of water.

A crowd had followed us from the town, and took a position near the
observatory, as, no doubt, they thought that we would select the
best place for observing the eclipse.

On the last glimpse of day-light vanishing, the crowd never fail to
give expression to their feelings with a noise that is unlike anything
else that I have ever heard. It is not like the noise that a crowd
makes on seeing a lovely rocket burst, or that which they make on
seeing some acrobat perform a wonderful feat. No; there is an
expression of terror in it. It is not a shout; it is a moan.

Before giving a description of the photograms of the Total Eclipse,
it will be necessary to refute some opinions that have gratuitously
been given respecting them. After I had carefully examined the
negatives, and made drawings, I had the drawings and the negatives
compared by Mr. Langton, who expressed his opinion that they were
faithful copies; and when I found that it would be many months before
I could get funds to print my Report, it was agreed upon, after
consulting some friends, that the negatives of totality should be
sent to England. Unfortunately, I selected Mr. De la Rue as the
fittest person to examine them. He never acknowledged the receipt
of them, and, after many months, Mr. Falconer, who had returned to
England, sent me a copy of a letter to him, from Mr. De la Rue:

          "THE OBSERVATORY, CRANFORD, MIDDLESEX,
                                     "Dec. 27th, 1869.

"My Dear Sir,-I am very sorry to have caused any uneasiness to
Commander Ashe; but one circumstance and another have delayed my
writing to him. I have received his papers, which I sent to the
Astronomical, and later on, the original negatives, which arrived
safely, although Commander Ashe had neglected the precaution of
protecting them with a covering of glass. There is evidence in these
negatives of the telescope having moved, or, perhaps, followed
irregularly, during the exposure of the plates, and this renders
the dealing with the negatives very difficult; moreover, it contradicts
the theory set forth by Commander Ashe in respect to a certain
terrace-like formation in the prominences, and also the rapid shooting
out of a certain prominence. The American photographs are very much
more perfect than those sent by Commander Ashe; in fact, they leave
nothing to be desired. To correct the defects of duplication in
Commander Ashe's photographs, would entail some expense, [I understand
that Mr. De la Rue has spent 300 pounds, in patching up Major
Tennant's photograms.] and much trouble; and it would be necessary
for hint to re-write his paper.

"I have only returned to my house (after an absence of a year) a
few months ago, and have had Major Tennant's paper to see through
the press; so that my correspondence has fallen greatly into arrears.
Wishing you the compliments of the season, I am, with best regards,

                         "Yours sincerely,
                                  "WARREN DE LA RUE.


"Alexander Pytts Falconer, Esq.,
            "Bath."

Here is a very serious charge. I am accused of foisting on the
public a marvellous account of the eclipse, which my own negatives
contradict; but I shall have no difficulty in shewing conclusively
that Mr. De la Rue has made a blunder, when he says that "there is
evidence of the telescope having moved, or, perhaps, followed
irregularly." It would have been better had Mr. De la Rue produced
his evidence before he takes upon himself to assert that the negatives
contradict my statements.

But the crimes I am charged with are, that on the 7th of August last,
some person or persons did, accidentally or maliciously, disturb
the telescope, during the exposure of plates Nos. III. and IV., and
that the said plates mislead, and are not faithful representations
of the phenomena seen and also, that they contradict the statements
of Commander Ashe, with regard to the "rapid shooting out of a certain
prominence."

In clearing myself of these heavy charges, I shall divide my evidence
into two parts-negative and positive.

In the first place, the telescope was firmly placed upon a platform
made by the heavy sleepers borrowed from the railway station, and
surrounded by boards, as may be seen in the photograms; and Commander
Ashe has been too long at sea to travel 1398 miles with a heavy
telescope, and then not to be able to give it stability. There were
four persons inside the building--Mr. Falconer, seated some distance
from the telescope, observing the general appearance of the eclipse
with the naked eye; Mr. Stanton upon a platform, ready to uncover
and cover the object-glass with a light cloth; Mr. Douglas in the
dark room, and myself at the telescope, which was firmly clamped
in hour-angle, and declination. The people outside were at a distance
upon an elevation, and were quite still. The telescope, if it moved,
must have moved in hour-angle, or declination, or in both; if it
moved in hour-angle, the endless screw must have tripped upon the
driving-wheel, which it could not do without making a noise, which
would have been heard by me. If it moved in declination, Mr. Stanton
must have moved it in uncovering the object-glass; but in so doing,
he must have given the telescope a pretty hard blow, of which he must
have been aware. But neither Mr. Stanton nor myself are aware of any
disturbance of the telescope. There was no wind, which would only
have caused a vibration, and given a blurred image. In examining
Nos. I. and II. photograms, the limb of the moon may be clearly traced,
and there is not a shadow of suspicion of any relative motion in the
telescope. Here we have proof that the driving clock was performing
its duty well for the first half of totality; and no one will have
the hardihood to say that it altered its rate in the next minute and
a-half. In looking at No. IV. photogram, we see that a point of
light is double. Now, we will suppose this duplication was caused
by the telescope receiving a smart blow; then, by drawing a line
through the two positions of the same object, we get the direction
of the motion. Now, look to the right and we see a protuberance
with a triplicate form. Here, then, the telescope must have received
two blows; and by drawing a line along the top of the three figures,
we get the direction of the motion, or disturbance; and on looking
at the different directions of the two motions, we see that the
telescope moved two ways at once, and also, that one part of the
plate was disturbed once, whilst another part of the same plate was
disturbed twice--which is absurd; and lastly, Mr. Vail who had not
seen the photograms when he wrote his report, gives a description of
certain lines and cracks that are to be seen in the negatives when
they are examined by a lens. How is it possible to get over this?
Here, an American gentleman sees with a telescope exactly what is
photographed. But this is negative testimony; I will now prove,
conclusively, giving geometrical evidence, that Mr. De la Rue has
made an egregious misstatement. The reader will have it in his power
to corroborate this testimony. Place a piece of paper behind the
photograms III. and IV. (taken in the principal focus), and with a
needle make holes in four or five different places, taking care not
to mark the bottom of a protuberance, which is a notch, but where
you can see distinctly the limb of the moon; then remove the paper
and find the centre of three holes, and draw a circle through them;
and if it passes over the other holes, you have positive proof that
the centre did not move during the exposure. Now, look at the
lithograph, and you will see a circle drawn through five marks made
upon the limb of the moon of No. III., and through four marks made
upon the limb of the moon of No. IV.--_Q. E. D._

[Photograph: IV.]

Having proved that the very remarkable photograms taken at Jefferson
are correct representations of the phenomena seen at that place, I
will proceed to describe the details of the four negatives that are
to be seen when examined with a lens.

The moment the sun disappeared, out flashed the corona, which
resembled an aurora, and no doubt belongs to the sun, and not to the
moon. No. I. shews the continuous mass of red matter with the
flame-like appearance of the so-called "Ear of corn;" a little to
the left are seen two detached red lumps, like glowing coals; and
underneath is seen the slightest trace of a prominence that is to
play a conspicuous part in the eclipse. No. II., the limb of the
moon, is seen completely round, and a little more is seen of the
prominence underneath. Now, it is time to remark that the flame-like
mass in No. I., and the detached prominences in Nos. I. and II.,
appear to cut in upon the limb of the moon. Dr. Curtis, after trying
several experiments, is firmly convinced that this appearance is
entirely due to a photographic effect, by excessive overexposure
of the plates. I have to remark, that nothing was more conspicuous
than the indentations of the glowing masses upon the limb of the
moon. Remember that these protuberances were not dazzling lights,
but could be contemplated with the greatest comfort; and the eye is
so fastidious, that in running round the limb of the moon, it
immediately detects the sudden break in the circumference. But I
have a theory, and it is dangerous to trust the eye of a man with
a theory, without good support. Directly after the eclipse, some
of those outside joined us, and the conversation was upon the
extraordinary shooting-out of the prominence, which they were all
describing. In the midst of the conversation, a carpenter touched
me on the arm, and said: "But what were the notches on the moon?" Now,
this is conclusive evidence, and would be taken in any court of law.
Remember, the word "notches," (the language of a carpenter) is his
own, and no other word do I think so applicable. I answered that
I did not know, and that nothing puzzled me more. On examining the
negatives with a lens, I saw the limb of the moon distinctly through
the prominence; and further, that the part on the moon was a similar
and inverted figure to the upper part, and I was convinced that the
"notch" was caused by reflection of the protuberance on the surface
of the moon.

Let B F be the height of the protuberance, and L B the line of
sight, tangent to the point B, and let the lines of sight, both
direct and reflected, be considered parallel to each other; now,
through the point D draw a tangent, and let the incident ray, F D,
and the reflected ray, O D, make equal angles with it; then, the
exterior angle, O D C, is equal to the angles D AC and A C D; take
away the right angles, D and A, and we have the remaining angles,
O D E and C, equal; and B A (the depth of the notch) is equal to
the versine of the angle of reflection.

[Illustration: Fig 1, Fig 2, Fig 3]

In measuring the enlarged photogram, B C was 1.87 inches, and B F,
0.07 inches; and as B C, the moon's semi-diameter on the 7th August,
subtended an angle of 16'.29" = _a_. Let C F subtend an angle = _y_.

                        1.87 cot. _a_     ' "
      Then cotan. _y_ = ------------- = 17.54 = _y_.
                          1.94        16.29 = _a_.
                                       ' "
     Angle subtended by protuberance = 1.25.

As Mr. Douglas had no one to help him in the dark room, there was
some delay in getting No. III. plate; but whilst I was waiting for
it, out shot an enormous flame from the bright point before mentioned.
It shot out in about three seconds, not unlike a jet of gas from
a coal in the grate and when it reached its greatest height (about
one-third higher than that seen in photogram), it was blown off to
the left, just like a flame acted on by a "blow-pipe," and came
to a point. The part blown off was a bright white flame. (See
lithograph.) Now, as my veracity, after Mr. De la Rue's letter, is
doubtful, and as this phenomenon was not seen any where else besides
Jefferson, I must substantiate the fact, Mr. Falconer, in his report
to me, gives a drawing which is very similar to fig. No. 2; he says:
"It assumed the shape of a red-hot crooked bar of iron; this, resting
on the dazzling silvery coronal light, gave a strange and wonderous
addition to the glorious scene we now beheld." But it was seen by
all, and can be attested to by hundreds.

When No. III. plate was ready, it had lost about one-third of its
height, and its flame-like appearance.

When No. III, plate is examined with a lens, all the lines that are
shewn in fig. 3 are seen; and here I must make an extract from the
report of Mr. Vail, who was observing the eclipse with an excellent
42-inch telescope, by Dolland, and who made his report long before
I had examined the negatives with a lens. In speaking of this
protuberance, he says: "Its outlines were perfectly well defined, and
were not curves, but rather irregularly broken straight lines, and
throughout it seemed marked by similar lines. It reminded me of the
appearance one sometimes sees on the face of a cliff, where the
rock is broken by horizontal and vertical lines." Now, it is most
evident that Mr. Vail saw with a telescope what I photographed; and
further, it would be impossible to have these delicate lines in a
photogram, if there was any relative motion. Without entering into
any discussion about what the protuberances are, or are not, I will
only say that when the flame burnt out, the residium was a cinder, and
which is shewn in photogram No. III.; this quickly tumbled down into
a great heap, as seen in No. IV.

But the fault of the Canadian party consists in not having photograms
similar to those of the American astronomers, which all more or
less agree with each other. This is extremely hard, and although
I congratulate those gentlemen on their well earned reputation,
still I trust that our photograms, instead of contradicting one
another, will be found consistent.

I believe that Jefferson City was the most westerly place where
photograms of the eclipse were taken, and directly totality finished
with us, it commenced at Des Moines, so that the photograms taken
there must be compared with ours.

There is a general belief that the protuberances do not change
their form, at least but slowly, so it is of great consequence
to substantiate my statement, which is, that whilst waiting for No.
III. plate this protuberance shot out, and when No. III. photogram
was taken it had lost its flamelike appearance, and about one-third
its height. No IV. photogram shews the great prominence much reduced
in height and increased in breadth, as if it had tumbled into a
heap of burning matter. I cannot say whether all prominences are
formed by the shooting-out of a flame, and then tumbling into a
heap, but I do say that the great protuberance was formed in that
manner. In looking at the Des Moines photogram, taken near the end
of the eclipse, (I don't mean the engraving,) you see a great heap,
not very unlike that seen in No. IV.; and Dr. Curtis remarks "that
there is the same appearance of vast volumes of matter tossed up
into an irregular heap by the ejecting force, and sinking back again.
on all sides in long vertical rolls." This is a very good description
of what actually took place. Unfortunately, the long exposure of
sixty-six seconds gives a softened appearance, and what should
have appeared as a heap of cinders, now looks like a fluid.

[Photographs: II, I, IV, III]

I now come to the most remarkable photogram that has ever been
taken of an eclipse. No. IV. was taken as near the limb of the sun
as it is possible to take one, for on shutting down the slide, out
burst the sun. In this photogram you can see two luminous concentric
bands running from A to E, separated by a dark space, or rather a
dark band, which takes its origin on a part of the protuberance A.
(See fig. 3.) These bands are crossed by numerous bright rays, all
parallel to themselves and to the protuberances A and E. There are
two bright beams, and both, together with the bright rays, are
divided by this dark band. At E is seen the protuberance with a
triplicate form, and appears to be three parallel planes of light;
upon the upper one there appears a dark line, similar to those
seen upon fig. 3. Now, on looking at the Des Moines photogram, you
actually see the stumps of these three parallel planes; could
anything be more satisfactory? I will leave it to others to discuss
these various phenomena, which will throw much light on the physical
constitution of the sun, but will recapitulate some of the facts
deduced from our observations. The corona belongs to the sun, and not
to the moon. Some of the protuberances are formed by the shooting
of a flame, which burns out, leaving something that looks like a
cinder, which crumbles into a heap, and then retains that form for
some time; that there are luminous gases that surround the sun in
concentric strata divided by a non-luminous layer; that the notches
on the limb of the moon are the reflections of the upper part of the
protuberances from the surface of the moon; that at a great distance
from the sun there is a violent current of gas in an opposite
direction to the motion of the sun upon its axis; that the light
band surrounding the moon's limb in photograms of the partial
eclipse, may be caused by the reflection from the second or under
side of the plate.

In conclusion, I congratulate those gentlemen who so kindly assisted
me on our complete success, especially my dear friend and old
ship-mate, Professor Stephen Alexander, without whose assistance
no Canadian party would have been formed; and also, Mr. Vail, of
Philadelphia, who kindly joined our party, and whose annexed report
gives such ample proof of the value of our negatives.

                                   E. D. ASHE,
                             Commander, Royal Navy,
                                Director Observatory, Quebec.

  June 22nd, 1870.






                    REPORT OF MR. VAIL.

                              "BOSTON, August 21, 1869.

"Commander ASHE, _Quebec Observatory_.

"DEAR SIR,--I owe you an apology for not writing earlier, and
communicating my observations on the eclipse; but since I parted
from you at Detroit, I have been so constantly on the move, as to
seem to have no opportunity. I will now state briefly a few phenomena
that I noticed at the time of the eclipse, most of which I think
were communicated to you verbally before.

"After the clouds that partially obscured the sari on the morning of
the 7th had passed away, I observed that though the atmosphere was
hazy, and the sky by no means blue, there was an unusual stillness
and freedom from agitation in the air, so that the outlines of the
spots on the sun were clearly defined in the small Dolland telescope
that I had under my charge, and this satisfactory condition of the
air for telescopic observation continued until after the end of
totality. The first contact was at 3h. 38m. 10s local time. It was
probably about 3s. after this, before you were notified that the
eclipse had begun, two or three seconds being lost in determining
whether it was the limb of the moon, indenting the edge of the sun,
or not. Your first photograph was therefore probably five or six
seconds after the beginning. The passage of the edge of the moon
over the larger spot on the sun, I noted as follows:--

                                                H. M. S.
     Contact with the Penumbra................. 4  3 34
        "     "    "  Umbra.................... 4  3 56
     Complete obscuration of Umbra............. 4  4 34

"The time both of the beginning and end of totality, for reasons
verbally stated to you, I failed to note. Of the phenomena during
totality, those which I most noted were, first, the disappearance
of the last rays of the sun in an irregular broken line of light,
succeeded at or near this point by a band or corona of a silvery
white light almost as bright as the face of full moon. This though
much wider at this point than elsewhere, was soon observed to extend
in an entire ring around the dark body of the moon; from this luminous
ring, rays of light seemed to shoot out at right angles on every
side, diverging as it were from the centre of it. In some places
they seemed to extend out nearly half the diameter of the moon
from the bright ring; in others, not one fourth so far. But the
most remarkable appearance of all, and that which attracted the
attention of every one who witnessed the eclipse, whether seen
with the naked eye or with the telescope, were the red protuberances
that shot up immediately on the disappearance of the sun, from various
places, on the edge of the moon; their position your photograph will
fix better than I describe. The largest was on the lower edge of
the moon, and was by my estimate, when highest, not less than two
minutes in altitude from the edge of the moon, or about 55,000 miles.
Its colour was a bright _pinkish red_, its outlines were well defined,
and were not curves, but rather irregularly-broken straight lines,
and throughout it seemed marked by similar lines. It reminded me of
the appearance one sometimes sees on the face of a cliff where the
rock is broken by horizontal and vertical lines. The same or nearly
the same appearance would be presented if one were to view columnal
basaltic rocks, from a point where the rocks in the rear would rise
above those in front. I would therefore suggest whether these lines
may not have a similar origin, and each be the outline of a vast
column of luminous matter thrown up above the atmosphere of the sun.
There was a constant fluctuation in the height of these coloured
protuberances during the total eclipse; the large one was the only
one that was seen throughout the whole time, and that remained
visible for some time after the edge of the sun appeared.

The general phenomena, such as the darkness, the shining of the
stars, &c, I had less opportunity of noticing than yourself and
others, who were without a telescope, and will therefore say nothing
about them. I have made no attempt to put my observations into any
regular form, but have hastily written such as I thought might be
of use to you, leaving it entirely to you to make any use of them.

                            "Very truly yours,
                                        "HUGH D. VAIL."
                         _________

                MR. FALCONER'S OBSERVATIONS.

"_To Captain_ ASHE, _R.N., &c., Observatory, Quebec:_

"Dear Sir,--As requested by you, I now give you the results of such
observations as were made by me on the 7th of August last, during
the progress of the eclipse.

The limbs of the moon could be clearly defined beyond the S. and S.E.
limbs of the sun. Shortly before totality, there appeared on the
sun's northern limb several watery-looking globules, which merged into
each other as they passed from West to East, and then disappeared.
At this instant, also, appeared distinct long, brilliant, yellow,
rays of light, running East and West, and far away, and as straight
as if ruled; others again ran North and South, and reminded me of
the glory ancient painters depict around the heads of Saints. On the
Southern limb appeared, just at totality, a large circular opening,
or ring of bright silvery light, which assumed the shape of a red-hot
crooked bar of iron. This, resting on the dazzling silvery coronal
light, gave a strange and wondrous addition to the glorious scene
we now beheld. Several constellations shone brightly fourth, and a
star or two low down on the Western horizon. I must not omit the
strange protuberances seen at this moment: on the Eastern side was
one like a tongue bent upwards, with streaks of a reddish hue; the
others the shape of knobs, dark and colorless, and rugged in outline.

"I now come to the general appearance of the land and sky, and the
changes that took place over the vast prairie, stretching far and
wide, upon which you had erected your observatory. It was long
before any appearance of gloom or darkness occurred, not till 4h.
29m., when a hazy gloom gradually spread over the broad expanse
which surrounded us. At 4h. 34m. was seen a dense cloud approaching
from the N.W. and S.W., rolling along in its course and obscuring
everything around. Indeed, it had the appearance of a coming storm,
and seemed in part to issue from the prairie. It did not reach or
envelope the observatory. In front of this was a lurid, unearthly
glare, clear and bright, of a greenish tinge; the dense prairie
grass around might have contributed to this effect. Presently,
when totality took place, all became comparatively dark; every
tongue was hushed amongst the groups of persons who had come out
on foot, or were seated in their waggons, from Jefferson and the
country around.

And what did they behold? A wondrous sight! At the moment of totality,
burst forth the beautiful coronal light of the brightness of burnished
silver! Upon the Southern portion of this ring of light, rested that
curved, elongated protuberance, of a fiery redness, rendered more
ruddy in contrast with the dazzling silvery light of the corona.

"Several constellations shone bright and clear; several stars also
were observed above the Western horizon. All these gave the scene
a magnificence and grandeur. Wonder and admiration sat upon every
face uplifted to the sky. Every voice was hushed. Sublime, indeed,
was the scene presented. In reverential awe the groups stood mute.
Each one seemed to ponder within himself over the glorious scene
in front of him.

"Presently, the light of the sun suddenly bursts forth; the clouds
which covered the vast prairie lift, and gradually roll away. Then
along the Western horizon are displayed long bright streaks of light,
as seen at the approach of coming day. The purple hue upon the distant
prairie vanishes. The stars also disappear, and the momentary night
is turned into day!

"A murmur is now heard, and voices arise, proclaiming the sublimity
of the scene they had just witnessed, one of the most wondrous and
imposing sights presented to the human eye, in the firmament of
heaven! The words of the Psalmist involuntarily fell from the lips:
'The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his
handiwork.'

"At the approach of totality, the station-master informed me his
poultry quietly went to roost. In Jefferson City, the swallows flew
down upon the ground, amidst the granite boulders, and remained
till the light returned, when they arose and flew wildly about.

"It remains only for me, in conclusion, to thank you and Mr. Douglas
for inviting me to join this highly-interesting expedition, and to
congratulate you and Mr. Douglas upon the great success which
attended your photographic operations.

"I have to thank you for beholding the wondrous and vast prairies
west of the Mississippi. 'Haec olim meminisse juvabit.'

"I remain, dear Capt. Ashe, yours very faithfully,

                               "ALEX. PYTTS FALCONER.

"GLENALLA, QUEBEC, _August_ 28_th_, 1869."







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Canadian Eclipse Party 1869, by 
Commander E. D. Ashe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADIAN ECLIPSE PARTY 1869 ***

***** This file should be named 35375.txt or 35375.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/3/7/35375/

Produced by Walter MacDonald II

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
